Nature Methods
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02879-w
Methods
Dataset construction
T o train CellSAM, we combined 10 separate datasets spanning a vari-
ety of modalities: TissueNet 28, DeepBacs64, BriFiSeg65, Cellpose25,26, 
Omnipose66,67, YeastNet68, YeaZ69, the 2018 Kaggle DSB 70, a collec -
tion of H&E datasets71– 77 and an internally collected dataset of phase 
microscopy images across eight mammalian cell lines (Phase400). 
The LIVECell63 dataset was held out for zero-shot/few-shot tests. Our 
collective dataset included images across multiple imaging modalities 
(brightfield, phase contrast, fluorescence and mass cytometry), imag-
ing targets (histology sections, yeast, cell culture, bacteria and nuclei), 
length scales and morphologies. We did not do any preprocessing and 
left pixel intensities untouched. We treated nuclear and whole-cell 
channels as green and blue channels in an RGB image, respectively, 
and the red channel was always blank. We moved the green channel to 
blue for nuclear-only datasets (that is, BriFiSeg and DSB) to keep the 
blue channel always occupied.
If available, we used predetermined train/validation/test splits 
for each dataset; otherwise, we introduced 80%–10%–10% data splits. 
For datasets with multiple FOVs of the same object set, we required all 
FOVs to belong to the same split. We deferred all duplicated samples 
to the train split for published datasets with a preexisting data leak 
(detected by pixel-wise hashing). Our assembled dataset kept all images 
in their original size. We followed a widely used annotation scheme for 
labeling our masks, with zero representing the background and unique 
positive integers representing different objects. Although this format 
precludes accurate segmentation of overlapping objects, labels of this 
kind were not present in the dataset we compiled. We filtered out invalid 
cell labels if the label contained disjoint regions or if the label had only a 
1-pixel height or width. The processed images with filtered annotations 
were used for training, validation and testing. We conducted some 
additional processing for LIVECell63. We converted annotations from 
the COCO format to the same labeling format that we used on the other 
datasets for consistency. We used Cellpose’s26 preprocessing function 
livecell_ann_to_masks() to remove overlapping regions. In addi-
tion, we noticed inconsistencies in ground truth labels as previously 
observed by the Cellpose team (see Fig. 1c in ref. 26). We thus manually 
inspected the LIVECell test split to divide the annotation quality into 
three classes: good, medium and poor. We randomly selected images 
in the good split of the test set for the CellSAM few-shot learning task.
We modified our preparation pipeline for the NeurIPS challenge 
dataset. In addition to our standard preprocessing, we reduced bright 
spots by linearly rescaling the raw pixel intensities such that the 99.9 
percentiles corresponded to 1.0. We then normalized each image with 
contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) 96 with a 
kernel size of 128 pixels. Our assembled NeurIPS dataset used a fixed 
image size of 512 × 512 pixels. Images shorter than 512 pixels on either 
axis were zero-padded up to 512. For images with more than 512 pixels 
on either axis, we tiled them to 512 × 512 pixels with a 25% overlap and 
filled the empty regions with zeros. Any cropped images without valid 
annotations were removed. All images were upsampled to 1,024 × 1,024 
as input for CellSAM. The NeurIPS training dataset includes all train/
validation/test splits from our standard datasets, plus the NeurIPS 
training and tuning datasets. We used NeurIPS open test set for valida-
tion and the hidden test set for the performance report.
Statistics on our full dataset are in Supplementary Table 1. T o aid 
reproducibility, the dataset labels in Supplementary Table 1 correspond 
to the labels present in our compiled dataset available at https://cell-
sam.deepcell.org.
CellSAM architecture
We adapted Anchor DETR62 for the object detector for CellSAM (Cell-
Finder). This choice was motivated by Anchor DETR being NMS97 free. 
NMS suppresses bounding boxes with a high amount of overlap to 
remove duplicate detections. Although this works well for natural 
images, cellular images often have tightly clustered objects, and 
NMS-based methods such as the R-CNN family 80,81 can suffer from 
a low recall in this setting. We replaced the Anchor DETR’s ResNet 98 
backbone with the ViT44 from the SAM model52; specifically, we used 
the base-sized ViT (ViT-B).
As the maximum number of cells per image is generally no more 
than 1,000, we increased the number of queries q to 3,500, 3.5 times the 
maximum number of cells, based on Fig. 12 in DETR99, which provided 
an estimate of the number of queries needed for a DETR method to 
detect all objects. We used one pattern p for the Anchor generation as 
most objects in cellular detection are usually of similar scale.
Training CellFinder: We used a base learning rate of 10− 4 for the 
Anchor DETR head and 10−5  for the SAM-ViT backbone. We used weight 
decay of 10−4  and clip norm of 0.1. We used AdamW100 with a step-wise 
learning rate scheduler that drops the learning rate by a factor of  
10 after the 1,960th epoch. We trained CellFinder for 2,800 epochs with 
a batch size of four across eight H100 GPUs.
Fine-tuning CellSAM : After we trained CellFinder with the 
SAM-ViT backbone, the SAM-ViT output features were no longer 
aligned with the rest of the model (that is, the prompt encoder and 
mask decoder). T o close this distribution gap, we froze the SAM-ViT 
(such that it continues to function well with CellFinder) and trained 
the neck of the SAM model. We trained this neck using ground truth 
bounding boxes as inputs and segmentation masks of individual cells 
as targets. We used a learning rate of 10 −4  and a weight decay of 10 −4  
for this training. We also used AdamW100 for this training and did not 
clip the gradient.
We found this training recipe to be best with respect to computa-
tional cost and overfitting, based on small-scale ablation experiments.
Inference
At inference, we followed the following workflow. First, the input was 
passed through the Anchor DETR fine-tuned ViT-B. This resulted in an 
embedding dimension of 768. This embedding was then passed as an 
input to two parts of CellSAM: (1) the trained Anchor DETR module 
(CellFinder) and (2) the fine-tuned neck, which is a two-dimensional 
convolutional network reducing the embedding dimensionality fur -
ther to 256. The bounding box outputs of CellFinder were then sent 
into the prompt encoder, resulting in the prompt embedding. The 
prompt embeddings and neck embedding were then passed to the 
mask decoder, which outputs pixel-wise probabilities for the cell and 
another IoU-based confidence value for the prediction as a whole. 
This results in a tensor of shape N × W × H, where N corresponds to the 
number of cells predicted. This tensor was processed with a sigmoid 
and a threshold operation, resulting in binarized images. Depending 
on the metric used, either we used this tensor directly with the N scores 
(specifically for computation of the COCO AP @ 0.5 IoU) or we com -
puted the argmax over the cell dimension N to generate a tensor W × H, 
where each pixel corresponded to a unique integer label for each cell.
Thresholding: Given CellSAM’s model architecture, we had three 
different thresholds at inference time. First, we had a threshold on the 
bounding boxes generated by CellFinder, which we set to 0.4 across all 
datasets. We dynamically adjust this threshold by clustering the con-
fidence values. We perform k-means clustering (k = 2) for the box con-
fidences of all cells for a given image. We then compute the mean of 
both clusters (T μ )—that is, the separation between likely non-  
cells and cells. We then adjust the final bounding box threshold as 
Tbox =
2
3
× 0.4 +
1
3
× Tμ . The resulting boxes were passed through the 
Mask Decoder. We had an overall mask score outputted by the IoU 
prediction head of the Mask Decoder, which we set to 0.5. Lastly, we 
thresholded the mask decoder output after applying the sigmoid func-
tion to each pixel, which we set at 0.5.
CellSAM postprocessing: We used the same postprocessing steps 
that are used by Cellpose 32. This consisted of hole filling and island 
removal for each predicted cell.