Nature Methods | Volume 22 | December 2025 | 2585–2593
 2587
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02879-w
description of data sources and preprocessing steps can be found in 
Appendix A. Our full, preprocessed dataset is publicly available at 
https://cellsam.deepcell.org.
CellSAM creates masks using box prompts generated from 
CellFinder
In early experiments, we found that providing ground truth bounding 
boxes as prompts to SAM (ground truth prompts represent an upper 
bound on performance) achieved substantially higher zero-shot 
performance than point prompting (Extended Data Fig. 1). This is in 
agreement with previous analyses of SAM applied to biological61 and 
medical53 images. Because the ground truth bounding box prompts 
yield accurate segmentation masks from SAM across various datasets, 
we sought to develop an object detector that could generate prompts 
for SAM in an automated fashion. Given that our zero-shot experiments 
demonstrated that ViT features can form robust internal representa-
tions of cellular images, we reasoned that we could build an object 
detector using the image features generated by SAM’s ViT. Previous 
work explored this space and demonstrated that ViT backbones can 
achieve state-of-the-art performance on natural images78,79. For our 
object detection module, we use the Anchor DETR62 framework with 
the same ViT backbone as the SAM module; we call this object detection 
module CellFinder. Anchor DETR is well suited for object detection in 
cellular images because it formulates object detection as a set predic-
tion task. This allows it to perform cell segmentation in images with 
densely packed objects, a common occurrence in cellular imaging data. 
Alternative bounding box detection methods (for example, the R-CNN 
family) rely on non-maximum suppression (NMS)80,81, leading to poor 
performance in this regime. Methods that frame cell segmentation as 
a dense, pixel-wise prediction task (for example, Mesmer28, Cellpose25 
and Hover-net30) assume that each pixel can be uniquely assigned to a 
single cell and cannot handle overlapping objects.
The ground truth prompting scheme by itself does not achieve 
real-world performance standards. Our analysis showed that SAM 
cannot accurately segment many cell types, likely due to the distribu-
tion of images seen during training. T o adapt CellSAM from natural 
images to cellular images, we fine-tune the SAM model neck (the lay-
ers connecting SAM’s ViT to its decoder) while leaving other layers 
frozen to retain generalization ability. Training CellSAM in this manner 
achieved state-of-the-art accuracy when provided with ground truth 
bounding box prompts (Supplementary Fig. 1).
We train CellSAM in two stages; the full details can be found in 
the supplementary materials. In the first stage, we train CellFinder on 
the object detection task. We convert the ground truth cell masks into 
bounding boxes and train the ViT backbone and the CellFinder module. 
Once CellFinder is trained, we freeze the model weights of the ViT and 
fine-tune the SAM module as described above. This accounts for the 
distribution shifts in the ViT features that occur during the CellFinder 
training. Once training is complete, we use CellFinder to prompt SAM’s 
mask decoder. We refer to the collective method as CellSAM; Fig. 1 
outlines an image’s full path through CellSAM during inference.
Benchmarking CellSAM’s performance on numerous 
biological datasets
We benchmarked CellSAM’s performance using F1 error (1 − F1) as met-
ric (Fig. 2b) against Cellpose, a widely used cell segmentation algorithm. 
Because our work includes both dataset and model development, we 
chose benchmarks that allow us to measure the contributions of data 
and model architecture to overall performance. Our benchmarks 
include comparisons to a pretrained generalist Cellpose model (cyto3), 
an internally trained generalist Cellpose model and a suite of internally 
trained specialist (that is, trained on a single dataset) Cellpose models. 
Internally trained models were trained on the CellSAM dataset or a 
suitable subset using previously published training recipes, whereas 
evaluations were performed on a held-out split of the same dataset. We 
further evaluated CellSAM’s performance on the evaluation split of the 
NeurIPS Cell Segmentation Challenge82 (Fig. 2b). For this evaluation, we 
fine-tuned CellSAM with an additional hematology dataset, which was 
Input image CellFinder
Prompt
encoder
Output segmentation
Vision transformer
Upscale mask
embeddings
Transformer
decoder
Transformer decoderTransformer
encoder
Downsample
Mask predictor
Segment anything model decoder
Fig. 1 | CellSAM: a foundational model for cell segmentation. CellSAM 
combines SAM’s mask generation and labeling capabilities with an object 
detection model to achieve automated inference. Input images are divided into 
regularly sampled patches and passed through a transformer encoder (that is, a 
ViT) to generate information-rich image features. These image features are then 
sent to two downstream modules. The first module, CellFinder, decodes these 
features into bounding boxes using a transformer-based encoder–decoder pair. 
The second module combines these image features with prompts to generate 
masks using SAM’s mask decoder. CellSAM integrates these two modules using 
the bounding boxes generated by CellFinder as prompts for SAM. CellSAM is 
trained in two stages, using the pretrained SAM model weights as a starting point. 
In the first stage, we train the ViT and the CellFinder model together on the object 
detection task. This yields an accurate CellFinder but results in a distribution 
shift between the ViT and SAM’s mask decoder. The second stage closes this gap 
by fixing the ViT and SAM mask decoder weights and fine-tuning the remainder 
of the SAM model (that is, the model neck) using ground truth bounding boxes 
and segmentation labels.