Nature Methods | Volume 22 | December 2025 | 2585–2593 2588
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02879-w
a substantial fraction of the NeurIPS challenge dataset. In almost every 
comparison, we found that CellSAM outperformed generalist Cellpose 
models (whether pretrained or internally trained) and was equivalent 
to specialist Cellpose models trained exclusively on individual datasets. 
We highlight features of our benchmarking analyses below.
• CellSAM is a strong generalist model. Generalization across cell 
morphologies and imaging datasets has been a major challenge 
for deep-learning-based cell segmentation algorithms. T o evaluate 
CellSAM’s generalization capabilities, we compared the perfor-
mance of CellSAM and Cellpose models trained as specialists (that 
is, on a single dataset) to generalists (that is, on all datasets). Con-
sistent with the literature, we observe that Cellpose’s performance 
degraded when trained as a generalist (Extended Data Fig. 3). By 
contrast, we found that the performance of CellSAM-generalist 
was equivalent to or better than CellSAM-specialist across all 
data categories and datasets (Extended Data Fig. 3). Moreover, 
CellSAM-generalist outperformed Cellpose-generalist in all data 
categories (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3). This analysis 
highlights an essential feature of a foundational model: maintain-
ing performance with increasing data diversity and scale.
• CellSAM achieves human-level accuracy for generalized cell 
segmentation. We use the error (1 − F1) to assess the consistency 
of segmentation predictions and annotator masks across a series 
of images. We compared the annotations of three experts with 
each other (human versus human) and with CellSAM (human 
versus CellSAM). This comparison explores whether CellSAM’s 
performance is within the error margin created by annotator 
preferences (for example, the thickness of a cell boundary). We 
compared annotations across four data categories: mammalian 
cells in tissue, mammalian cells in cell culture, bacterial cells and 
yeast cells. A two-sided t-test revealed no significant differences 
d
a b c
975K
1M
Annotations
Tissue
Cell Culture
H&E
Bacteria
Yeast
Nuclear
0
100K
CellSAMCellpose
Tissue
Cell Culture
Bacteria Yeast
Nuclear
H&E
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Error (1 – F1)
NeurIPS challenge
All
Bacteria
Cell Culture
Tissue
Yeast
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Error (1 – F1)
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
Human/Human
Human/CellSAM
Fluorescence Tissue
F1 error 0.06
Phase Cell Culture
F1 error 0.08
Brightfield H&E
F1 error 0.09
Fluorescence Bacteria
F1 error 0.05
MIBI Tissue
F1 error 0.04
Fluorescence Cell Culture
F1 error 0.09
Brightfield Yeast
F1 error 0.09
Phase Bacteria
F1 error 0.08
Fig. 2 | CellSAM is a strong generalist model for cell segmentation. a, For 
training and evaluating CellSAM, we curated a diverse cell segmentation 
dataset from the literature. The number of annotated cells is given for each 
data type. Nuclear refers to a heterogeneous dataset (DSB)70 containing nuclear 
segmentation labels. b, Segmentation performance for CellSAM and Cellpose 
across different data types. We compared the segmentation error (1 − F1) for 
models that were trained as generalists (that is, the full dataset). Models were 
trained for a similar number of steps across all datasets. We observed that 
CellSAM-generalist had a lower error than Cellpose-generalist on all tested data 
categories. Furthermore, we validated this finding on a held-out competition 
dataset from the Weakly Supervised Cell Segmentation in Multi-modality 
High-Resolution Microscopy Images (that is, the NeurIPS challenge)91. Error 
bars were computed by computing the segmentation error per image and then 
calculating the mean and s.e. The categories contained the following number 
of samples: Tissue = 330, Cell Culture = 144, H&E = 51, Bacteria = 260, Yeast = 32 
and Nuclear = 56. c, Human versus human and CellSAM-generalist versus 
human (CellSAM/human) inter-rater performance comparison. A two-sided 
t-test confirms that no statistical difference exists between CellSAM and human 
performance. d, Qualitative results of CellSAM segmentations for different data 
and imaging modalities. Predicted segmentations are outlined in red. NS, not 
significant.