Nature Methods
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02879-w
Inference time: We compute the inference time as a function of 
the number of cells (Supplementary Fig. 1).T o generate this plot, we 
randomly sampled two images from each dataset in our test set and fil-
tered them to ensure a diverse range of cell counts. All benchmarks were 
performed on a single A6000 GPU. Unlike Cellpose, which requires 
only a single model pass, CellSAM performs one pass for each query 
(that is, each cell). As a result, the wall clock timescales (approximately) 
linearly with the number of cells. We also compare CPU and GPU infer-
ence times for both CellSAM and Cellpose on n = 20 randomly sampled 
images. Whereas, for GPU-based inference, both CellSAM and Cellpose 
take less than 1 second per image, Cellpose takes on average almost 
8 seconds per image on CPU and CellSAM close to 12 seconds on CPU.
Model implementation and training. CellSAM was implemented in 
PyT orch101. For CellFinder, we modified the official Anchor DETR repo 
(https://github.com/megvii-research/AnchorDETR). For CellSAM, we 
modified the official Segment Anything repo (https://github.com/
facebookresearch/segment-anything). We used PyT orch Lightning102 
to scale the training. Prototyping was done using NVIDIA’s RTX 4090. 
We used machines with NVIDIA A6000s, A100s (40-GB and 80-GB ver-
sions) or H100s for the experiments in the paper. The overall training 
time for CellSAM-generalist was 6 days, 12 hours on 8× A100 GPUs for 
training CellFinder and an additional 1 day for fine-tuning the com -
plete CellSAM model (note: fine-tuning was done on a 1× 4090 GPU). 
For the specialist models, these numbers can be linearly scaled by the 
fraction of the total data used (for example, for 1/9 of the time for 1/9 
of the data). Below, we added a plot of the training curves for training 
CellFinder and CellSAM-generalist (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Three-dimensional integration
We use u-segment3D 89 to generate three-dimensional cellular seg -
mentations. We first segment each two-dimensional slice using the 
CellSAM-generalist model. We then remove small masks and fill holes 
using Cellpose’s postprocessing. We then use the u-segment3D 89 
indirect method to fuse the two-dimensional segmentations to 
three dimensions.
Benchmarking
We benchmarked the performance of CellSAM models against 
Cellpose25,26 trained on our compiled datasets.
Cellpose model training. We utilized the command provided by the 
Cellpose developers to train our custom Cellpose models. Using Cell-
pose library version 3.0.11, we trained both specialist and generalist 
models from scratch26. python -m cellpose –train –train_size – 
use_gpu –dir { }–test_dir { } –img_filter_img –mask_filter _ 
masks –pretrained_model None –chan 3 -chan2 2
We kept all the hyperparameters untouched. We used the SGD 
optimizer with a weight decay of 10−5  and a batch size of 8. We trained 
each model for 500 epochs with a base learning rate of 0.2. We used the 
default learning rate scheduler. The learning rate increased linearly 
from 0 to 0.2 over the first 10 epochs and then decreased by a factor 
of 2 every 10 epochs after the 400th epoch. We trained each model on 
a single NVIDIA A6000 GPU. In total, we trained 10 specialist models 
and one generalist model. When evaluating the performance of the 
Cellpose model, we followed the implementation of the cyto3 model 
evaluating pipeline. We first estimated the cell diameters per image 
using a trained size model. Then, we predicted the segmentation masks.
Metrics. We used the Metrics package in the Cellpose library25,26. Pre-
dictions that match the ground truth labels (determined by a mask 
IoU ≥ 0.5) are true positives (TPs), predictions with no matching ground 
truth labels are false positives (FPs) and ground truth labels without 
a valid match are false negatives (FNs). For the human/human and 
CellSAM/human comparisons, we used a lower IoU threshold of 0.3 
to increase the size of our statistic (reflecting higher inter-rater vari-
ability). The CellSAM/human comparisons were made against all three 
annotators. CellSAM’s predictions were compared to each annotator, 
and each annotator was compared to every other annotator for the 
human/human comparison. We computed the recall, precision and 
F1 scores using the following formulas:
• Recall: recall =
TP
TP+FN
• Precision: precision =
TP
TP+FP
• F1: F1 =
2×precision×recall
precision+recall
We also used the COCO evaluation metrics79 during CellFinder’s 
development. The COCO metrics are a widely used benchmark for 
assessing the object-level quality of object detection and instance 
segmentation methods. These metrics report average precision—the 
area under the precision-recall curve for a given object class. In our 
case, we had only a single object class: cells. The average precision is 
computed for different IoU thresholds, ranging from 0.5 to 0.95, with 
a step size of 0.05. We report the mean average precision across all IoU 
thresholds, denoted as mAP, as well as the average precision at IoU = 0.5, 
denoted as AP50, to quantify CellFinder’s performance. Because the 
object density is much higher in cellular images than in natural images, 
we modified the limit for the maximum number of detections from 100 
to 10,000. We also fed the actual confidence score per binary prediction 
of the CellSAM model to the COCO evaluator. For the Cellpose models, 
we used a fixed confidence score of 1.0.
Hyperparameters
For training, there are two sets of parameters. The first is for training 
CellFinder, which we trained for 2,800 epochs with a batch size of four 
(primarily constrained by GPU memory) across eight GPUs. We used the 
AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 10−5  for the backbone and 10−4  
for the remainder of the model. We set weight decay 10−4  and dropout 
to 0.1. After 1,960 epochs, we reduced the learning rate by a factor of 
10. The full configuration file can be found in the GitHub repository.
The second set of parameters is fine-tuning CellSAM, which we 
trained for 50 epochs with a cosine learning rate schedule. This final 
fine-tuning primarily adjusts smaller components of CellSAM specifi-
cally, the ‘neck’ (a feedforward neural network between the ViT and 
the rest of the model), which is prone to overfitting and, thus, requires 
careful tuning.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All datasets with test/training/validation splits are publicly available 
at https://cellsam.deepcell.org.
Code availability
The code for CellSAM is publicly available at https://github.com/
vanvalenlab/cellsam.
References
96. Pizer, S. M. et al. Adaptive histogram equalization and its 
variations. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 39, 
355–368 (1987).
97. Hosang, J., Benenson, R. & Schiele, B. Learning non-maximum 
suppression. In Proc. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer  
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (IEEE, 2017); https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/CVPR.2017.685
98. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for 
image recognition. In Proc. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (IEEE, 2016); https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/CVPR.2016.90